	
	 Business_Reports 
	
	Entry Date:
	Today
	Modified: 13-05-2019	
Category:






 Business reports 
Reports describe, analyze, and investigate a situation for a particular 
audience. They have a formal structure and common sub-sections.  
 
Business reports are a type of assignment in which you analyze a situation 
or problem (either a real situation or a case study) and apply business 
theories to produce a range of suggestions for improvement. 
 
Business reports are typically assigned to enable you to: 
• Examine available and potential solutions to a problem, situation, or 
issue. 
• Apply business and management theory to a practical situation. 
• Demonstrate your analytical, reasoning, and evaluation skills in 
identifying and weighing-up possible solutions and outcomes. 
• Reach conclusions about a problem or issue. 
• Provide recommendations for future action. 
• Show concise and clear communication skills. 
 
Remember that with business reports, typically, there is no single correct 
answer but several solutions, each with their own costs and benefits to an 
organisation. It is these costs and benefits which you need to identify 
and weigh up in your report.  
 
Further, when writing the report, you need to consider the audience you 
are writing for: is it the CEO or will the report be available to all 
staff concerned? It is vital that you ensure an appropriate level of 
formality, sensitivity, fairness, and objectivity. Also, be mindful of the 
audience when writing recommendations. For example, your manager may not 
be able to influence company policies.  
 
  General format of a business report 
Check your assignment instructions regarding which sections you need in 
your report. Also determine whether you are writing an inductive or 
deductive report (see page 3). 
1 Letter or memo to the client 
2 Title Page       
3 Executive Summary      
4 Table of Contents (if required by your lecturer)  
5 Introduction     
6  Discussion
7 Conclusions      
8  Recommendations     
9 References     
10  Appendices (if required)      
There are conventions relating to what goes into each section.  The 
purpose of these conventions is to save the reader’s time.  If the reader 
just wants to know what your key findings are, they can turn immediately 
to the Executive Summary or the Conclusions section.   
Business reports   
  Business report – middle sections 
Business reports typically adopt the sections listed below.  The order of 
these sections varies depending on the subject and whether it is an 
inductive or deductive report. Business reports will also need a reference 
list, and sometimes a covering letter, covering memo, and / or Executive 
Summary section. 
 
  Introduction  
• State the purpose or aim of the report, which may include who has 
commissioned it.  
• Provide background details relevant to the situation, such as a brief 
overview of historical developments, as well as definitions of any terms 
that are unlikely to be recognized by the audience.  
• Summarize the problems and recommended solutions.  
• Clarify any limitations, restrictions, and/or assumptions made in 
undertaking your investigation of the situation, such as restrictions on 
time, lack of money, limited access to information and people, and/or 
assumptions made about the organisation because of the lack of information 
available.  
 
  Discussion  
This section is traditionally allocated the most marks. It is generally 
the only section where you are able to support your analysis and reasoning 
with theoretical ideas, concepts, and models available within the course. 
Secondly, it is the only place where you can actually provide evidence to 
back up your conclusions and recommendations. Therefore, ensure that you 
draw on evidence from the literature, course materials, as well as your 
own observations from the actual case or organisation, where applicable. 
A key task of the discussion is for you to be able to identify the 
problem(s) and then consider a range of possible solutions.  
 
  Conclusions  
• This is arranged as a numbered or bulleted list.  
• Match each point in sequence with the list of recommendations.  
• Each point provides a brief summary of one of the problems outlined in 
detail in the report.  
• Ensure each point links with the report's objectives.  
• Write each conclusion in the present tense.  
• Each point needs to be specific and clear.  
 
  Recommendations  
• This is also arranged as a numbered, bulleted list.  
• Each recommendation should appear in sequence with the order of points 
in the list of conclusions.  
• Each recommendation should provide a response to each problem identified 
in the list of conclusions.  
• Each recommendation should be action oriented, concise, and clear.  
• Each recommendation should also be realistic and feasible within the 
social, economic, and political climate.  
• Write each recommendation in the future tense, as appropriate.  
Business reports 
  Inductive vs. deductive reports 
The order of the report sections will depend on whether you are required 
to write an inductive or deductive report. Most assignments at Massey are 
inductive. Check your assignment instructions. 
 
	Inductive report            
 
	Introduction   Discussion   Conclusions   Recommendations 
 
	Deductive report            
	Introduction   Conclusion   Recommendations   Discussion   
 
Inductive report 
Such reports go from the specific to the general and are ideal for an 
audience who has the time to read the report from cover to cover. They are 
also used in instances where the findings may be somewhat controversial, 
hence, the need to demonstrate your reasoning and evidence (as laid out in 
the discussion) for the recommendations decided upon. 
 
Deductive report 
In contrast, in a deductive report you move from the general to the 
specific. This type of order is effective when faced with an audience who 
does not have time to read the whole document, but can access the    
conclusions and recommendations. Consequently, such an order is also 
appropriate for reports which are not contentious or unexpected in their 
decision outcomes and recommendations. 
 
  Executive Summary 
Executive summaries are being used increasingly in reports. A useful 
summary condenses the essence of the report so that the reader can quickly 
grasp the report’s aims, objectives and main findings (with key  
recommendations if the report is an action plan). 



This is changed



